articles/thinking-backwards#26-10-2020.md, before:

---
title: "Thinking Backwards - or: searching for the Big Why"
published: false
description: How thinking and working backwards gets your product work focused.
tags: #productivity #product #agile 
//cover_image: https://direct_url_to_image.jpg
---

Where to start? Every product work begins with this question; let it be concepting a complete new product idea, creating a simple feature enhancement or fixing a crucial bug.

I once wrote [another blog post](https://dev.to/pinussilvestrus/creating-the-unknown-what-and-what-not-to-build-in-efficient-prototypes-467p) about prototyping and how to use it to tackle uncertain problems. 

At [Camunda](http://camunda.com/) we follow the strategy to keep our work focus. One thing at a time, but doing this one thing right. That's great, but how do you know what this *one thing* is?

One principle my team more or less actively used in the past is to *work backwards*. This could sound like guessing the right solution, right? Let me explain.

### Working Backwards © Amazon

The idea of working backwards is not new, [Amazon "introduced" it a while ago](https://www.inc.com/justin-bariso/amazon-uses-a-secret-process-for-launching-new-ideas-and-it-can-transform-way-you-work.html). At the very beginning of developing new products, the product manager, or even better the team, writes an internal press release about the finished product. Before creating a single user story, without writing a single line of code.

The press release should be customer focussed, stating how current solutions are failing and why users will be amazed by the new product. Heaving this as a "solution sketch" they start iterating, keep on improving it. The key here: "Iterating on a press release is a lot less expensive than iterating on the product itself (and quicker!)" (Ian McAllister). 

I never wrote such a press release as the working backwards method requires. What's important to me here are the principles which are behind. That's why I'd rather call it *Thinking Backwards*. It does not start with a press release, a MVP, a mockup or a prototype. It starts with thinking.

### It's all about shaping

### Begin with the problem - jump back if necessary

### Find the Big Why

### Begin with the onboarding

### Summary

Commit message:

feat(working-backward): add shaping part

articles/thinking-backwards#26-10-2020.md, after:

---
title: "Thinking Backward - or: searching for the Big Why"
published: false
description: How thinking and working backward gets your product-work focused.
tags: #productivity #product #agile 
//cover_image: https://direct_url_to_image.jpg
---

Where to start? Every product work begins with this question; let it be ideate a completely new product idea, creating a simple feature enhancement, or fixing a crucial bug.

I once wrote [another blog post](https://dev.to/pinussilvestrus/creating-the-unknown-what-and-what-not-to-build-in-efficient-prototypes-467p) about prototyping and how to use it to tackle uncertain problems. 

At [Camunda](http://camunda.com/) we follow the strategy to keep our work focus. One thing at a time, but doing this one thing right. That's great, but how do you know what this *one thing* is?

One principle my team more or less actively used in the past is to *work backward*. This could sound like guessing the right solution, right? Let me explain.

### Working Backwards © Amazon

The idea of working backward is not new, [Amazon "introduced" it a while ago](https://www.inc.com/justin-bariso/amazon-uses-a-secret-process-for-launching-new-ideas-and-it-can-transform-way-you-work.html). At the very beginning of developing new products, the product manager, or even better the team, writes an internal press release about the finished product. Before creating a single user story, without writing a single line of code.

The press release should be customer focussed, stating how current solutions are failing and why users will be amazed by the new product. Heaving this as a "solution sketch" they start iterating, keep on improving it. The key here: "Iterating on a press release is a lot less expensive than iterating on the product itself (and quicker!)" (Ian McAllister). 

I never wrote such a press release as the working backward method requires. What's important to me here are the principles that are behind. That's why I'd rather call it *Thinking Backwards*. It does not start with a press release, an MVP, a mockup, or a prototype. It starts with thinking.

### It's all about shaping

[Basecamp did tremendous work in the past](https://basecamp.com/shapeup) to define what shaping of tasks means for successful product development. You could argue it's not feasible for any organization to do those 6 weeks of focused working sprints where the team is absolutely autonomous without any surrounding noise.

![shape up](https://dev-to-uploads.s3.amazonaws.com/i/mr2mj82ajv38n3fc7zs5.png)
<figcaption>Shape up phases by Basecamp, source: https://basecamp.com/shapeup/4.1-appendix-02</figcaption>

What's even more important is the *shaping* part at the beginning. Avoiding circles in the development phase is a key part of our work at Camunda. 

In the end, it's a matter of avoiding waste. Taking more teams to *really understand*  the problem and identify the core need will produce waste as well. That's okay if you compare the potential waste and problems of redefining requirements and refactoring huge parts of your implementation at the very end of the development lifecycle.

Of course, there will be cases where you feel spending more and more time shaping a topic will cause more time than needed. What's really important in this phase is to gather *learnings* and create a *focus* on the most relevant aspects. 

Afterward, it will be much easier to simply get the stuff done, without getting lost in circles. Build the one thing which matters and do it right. Which does not mean that circles even in the implementation phase are bad. But that's another topic.

picture: double diamond?

### Begin with the problem - jump back if necessary

...
### Find the Big Why

...
### Begin with the onboarding

...
### Summary
